# Photomapping Uganda

## Your project
This is an opportunity for you to tell us about your project. In this section we'd like to hear about your community, which local challenge your project addresses, what you plan to do and how, your sustainability plan, and how you plan to share your stories.

## Describe the local challenge your project is addressing
_In this section please describe in detail the challenge that your project addresses. We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words._

Uganda recently announced the creation of 15 new cities in the country. This was due to the ever increasing population within these municipalities therefore increasing the demand on the existing resources. Currently, the majority of these cities lack up-to-date geospatial information across their jurisdiction to allow city planners and administrators to effectively lobby, plan and distribute resources efficiently across the city. Huge resources and emphasis has been mostly placed in the capital city Kampala with limited resources allocated to cities for acquiring geospatial information. The lack of this information has therefore limited effective extension and monitoring of services and settlement across the majority of these new cities. Information about road conditions, garbage collection, environmental degradation as well as adherence to physical plans is not readily available to the city planners.

## Describe your project
In this section, please provide specific details about your mapping objectives. This should include: how you will contribute to help solve the local challenge you are addressing, what you aim to achieve with funding, what volume of mapping you plan to complete and how, and the number individuals are you aiming to include in mapping activities. We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

Under this project, OpenStreetMapUganda is looking to build upon its existing remote mapping efforts of the ongoing “mapping of the new cities initiative”. The proposed project will be planned over 2 major mapping activities. With the culmination of the remote mapping and validation exercises of the mapping new cities initiative, MapUganda plans to go a step further and introduce OSM photo mapping with mappillary to acquire more details of the recently remote mapped features. Under this exercise MapUganda plans to set up a OSM community engagement strategy that will allow youth mappers and the general OSM community to cohesively contribute crowdsourced images across all the newly setup cities in Uganda. Using the already existing youth mapper chapters MapUganda plans to coordinate a national wide mapillary campaign that will generate 100,000 new street level images. These images will then be uploaded to the mapillary portal and used to map extra details of features in OSM. The detail to be mapped will include road conditions, building material and height as well as business features identified in the images. The second phase will include creation of drone update drone imagery across the densely settled areas of Mbale city, this drone mapping event will be an opportunity to not only train some of the city administrators on the use of drone images for city planning but also provide more recent high resolution imagery that will allow for more detailed mapping of the cities. The extra detail features will include land use features, visible waste disposal areas, road conditions, roof material of major buildings. All this information is going to be shared and trained by the city planning administration of Mbale to assist visualize and understand the major environmental and physical planning challenges across the cities.


Describe your sustainability plan
In this section please describe how your activities will continue post-funding. If you are applying for funding to purchase equipment, explain who will store/use the equipment you purchase, and if you have long term sustainability plans for your community's development. We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

MapUganda plans to train over 100 youth mappers and OSM community volunteers that reside in or near by all the new cities. This will allow for the strengthening, expansion and spread of the OSM editing and mapillary contribution across the country. MapUganda also plans to train some of the UgandaRedCross Society (URCS) volunteers in the use of mapillary as URCS has one of the largest volunteer bases in the country. This will therefore have the possibility of spreading the use of OSM tools across multiple humanitarian sectors in the country. The Ministry of Lands and urban planning specifically the directorate of physical and urban planning and office of the prime minister will also be involved in the execution of the drone mapping and showcasing of the usefulness of mapillary information to the urban planning department.

What are your community defined project goals, and how do you define project success?
Please explain you project goals. This can include: setting goals such as "we will train X number of new mappers", "we will register as a legal entity", or "the data will be used by X", and why these goals are important to your community such as "we intent to be legally registered so that we can receive more grant funding in the future", "we intend to engage X number of women in mapping activities so that we can empower local women" or "we want to build a partnership with X so that our data will be used and trusted". We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

The plan for this project involves engaging at least 100 community volunteers in the nation wide street level mapillary campaign and training over 50 OSM community members in the use of mapillary generated images to validate and add extra tag information to OSM mapped features. MapUganda also plans to continue holding annual nationwide mapillary campaigns in collaboration with wikimedia Uganda chapter’s wiki loves monuments and wiki voyage campaigns. MapUganda is also planning to add mapillary OSM editing to its ongoing internship program. This will constantly allow for more OSM community members and interns to learn and hopefully keep using the skills acquired to keep editing OpenStreetMap.

What are your community's long term goals?
Please give describe your community's vision. This can include: where you see your community in five years time, how you want your data to be used, future partnerships you'd like to establish, or how you would like your community to grow (or not!). We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

MapUganda plans to have a vibrant OSM community of over 300 active mappers across that includes all youth mapper chapters in the country. MapUganda also plans to have a nationwide known internship program that will allow more recent graduates and students to be introduced to OSM in a systematic and well organised program.

List the tools you intend to use during your project and why
Please describe which tools you plan to use to collect, update, clean, or store you data and why. For example: "we plan to use HOT's Tasking Manager to coordinate volunteers" or "we will upload our data to X platform because..." We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

Mapillary mobile image capture: This tool is planned to be used to capture street level images of the cities that will be accessed through the OSM-mapillary plugins in ID editor and JOSM. These images will then be used to map extra details about the building, road and point features in OSM. OpenDroneMap: specifically webODM is planned to be used to process the drone images captured over Mbale city. This platform will be used to create orthomosaics of heavily settled and congested areas within the city boundaries. The high resolution imagery created will be used by the mappers to validate and improve the mapping in the Mbale city area. Extra information like roof type and material will also be added by the mappers.

OpenAerialMap: This platform will be used to host the high resolution imagery/orthomosaic created so that mappers can access it through ID editor and JOSM for in depth mapping and editing. QGIS: This open source desktop application will be used to create static maps of the area mapped and the maps shared with the city authorities as well as the ministry personnel. Umap: This open source platform will also be used to create interactive maps of the area mapped as well as the data added to OSM to share with the city authorities and ministry personnel


Explain how you plan to share your stories
Please give examples of how you will use share your stories with others. This can include: how you will publicise your news, where you will collect media content, how you will use social media channels, and if you will reach out beyond your immediate network to share your stories. We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

For this project, MapUganda is planning to use various social media accounts that include facebook, instagram, twitter, youtube and linkedIn to share the stories of all the street level photo mappers across the cities. MapUganda also plans to develop an impact video for showcasing some of the work the network of mappers would have created and what the information will be used for by the different agencies. This impact video will be placed on the MapUganda website and also shared on youtube and other social media platforms to major project stakeholders. MapUganda also plans to develop various progress blogs and vlogs about street level photo mapping.

Furthermore, MapUganda is planning to launch the first ever Ugandan geo podcast that will be discussing everything mapping but focusing first on the use of street level photo mapping and then delving deeper into the next level mapping techniques of the new decade. The podcast will be done on a monthly basis with various top geospatial and OSM community members invited to share ideas, thoughts and opinions on how the OSM community and mapping activities in Uganda are progressing. This podcast will be shared with the OSM Uganda, Africa and global communities through the whatsapp, telegram and OSM wiki pages. MapUganda will also add the links to the work made onto the weekly OSM bulletin newsletter.

Partnerships
Successful applications will demonstrate one or more partnerships with a local data user. Priority will be given to applications for which the data has been requested by a partnering organisation, or where the partner organisation has expressed interest in collecting the data for a specific use or intervention. Example partners include local non-government organisations (NGOs), community based organisations (CBOs), local governments, companies, universities, schools, and other academic institutions. '

Describe who will use your data
It is important that the data you generate during the project is useful, and that it will be used to advance humanitarian and/or development challenges locally. In this section, please include: if the data you will be collecting has been requested by a partnering organisation, if there is an established formal relationship with the partnering organisation, if there is an existing MoU between you and the partnering organisation, and how long have you been working with the partnering organisation. If your organisation or community is going to be the data user, please describe how you will use the data, and how it ties in with your organisation's work. We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

For this project, MapUganda is going to collect street level imagery and then train OSM community members to use mapillary photos to add features seen on OSM. The features added will include street lights, road conditions, building heights, building materials, business locations and names etc. MapUganda plans to share this information with the ministry of lands specifically the urban planning department that is embarking on acquiring more data to effectively plan and monitor the new cities. This drone imagery and photo mapped data will also be shared with the city planning authorities and local governments that include City Administrative and urban planning officers through static and interactive maps. The data will assist the city planners better plan for services within the cities.


Describe any other partnerships you plan to mobilise or establish for the purpose of the project
In this section, please describe any additional partners you might be working with. If there are no additional partners (beyond the data user) this must be stated here. We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

For this project MapUganda will strike a partnership with some of the local governments that include Mbale and Soroti. These local government partnerships will assist MapUganda acquire permissions to not only fly drones in the heavily settled areas but also assist with introducing OSM mapping tools and skills to the local government offices.

Inclusivity
Successful applications will include a developed strategy for the inclusion of women, girls, and marginalised groups in mapping activities. This includes the number of women, girls or marginalised groups you plan to engage, and the way in which you plan to interact with them.

How will you ensure that your project activities are inclusive?
Please describe how you will engage women and girls, or other marginalised communities in your mapping activities. Please include the number of women, girls or marginalised groups you plan to work with and how, and at which point in your activities you plan to engage them. We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

For this project MapUganda plans to use this opportunity to expand its OSM and wikimedia Uganda User group internship program to include training of participants to use mapillary for mapping on the OSM platform. The MapUganda internship was inaugurated in 2020 and attracted over 50 participants for 4 countries across Africa providing university graduates and industry professionals to learn and contribute to the OSM platform. The internship program was open to all people across the world.This year through this microgrant MapUganda plans to continue the internship with two more cohorts and introduce more training and learning sessions for the participants. This internship opportunity allows those who may not be able to participate on ground activities to be more involved in the growth of the OSM community across Uganda and Africa.MapUganda also plans to work with youth mapper chapters and also develop and promote an equitable gender strategy that will allow for the more vulnerable populations to be involved in the project. This will include actively seeking out partnerships with gender equality and inclusion advocacy groups working within the cities and across the country. MapUganda will also train its trainers and community engagement personnel to actively seek out, support and encourage female persons to attend for more of the online mapathons and training setup by MapUganda.

Expansion
Successful applications will show how communities intend to grow community engagement. This includes a practical approach on how many new mappers you aim to recruit and how they will be involved in community activities. Priority will be given to communities that also include a plan for ongoing engagement beyond the grant period. If this is not relevant to your project, please explain why.

Explain how you plan to expand your mapping community
In this section, please include: your approach to recruiting new mappers, how will you engage new mappers, how many new members you plan to recruit, and how will you retain community members throughout the duration of project and beyond. We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words.

The nation wide mapillary campaign launched will look to engage close to 40 new OSM community members from various youthmapper chapters and industry enthusiasts. The challenge will be launched country wide for people to take 100 street view photos using a mapillary application. This challenge will be published through the 10 youth mappers chapters and social media accounts of the MapUganda. Partner organizations such as Uganda Redcross Society will be contacted to tap into their network of volunteers to be involved in this campaign. A review will be conducted to assess who needs support in terms of equipment to carry out the nationwide campaign of street view mapping in the cities. Furthermore, volunteers and OSM community members attending the MapUganda internship program will also be trained on how to edit OSM using mapillary photos. In the subsequent years, the challenge will be held annually and extended to other universities beyond youth mappers groups and other organizations . The community engagement personnel at MapUganda will also be setting and community engagement strategy for the next 2 years that will seek to drive up more interest and participation within the OSM community. One of the major points will be to solidify the partnerships with institutions that each youthmapper chapter exists. MapUganda also plans to work closely with the faculty mentors of youth mappers to ensure there is continuity of growth of membership both within the chapters and subsequently the OSM and MapUganda membership and community


Collaboration
Priority will be given to applications that collaborate with other OSM communities in the region. This can be country specific or regional and can include collaboration with Youth Mappers Chapters, or members of the HOT community to help with training, validation (as examples). For support in sourcing collaborators, email microgrants@hotosm.org.

Describe other OSM communities you are already working with
This may include Youth Mappers chapters, or members of OSMF (as examples). If you are not already collaborating with an OSM community, please state this and explain how you plan to work with other communities in your project in the following question.

MapUganda is currently supporting OSM South Sudan, through assisting them with equipment and training material where necessary and possible. MapUganda is also working closely with OSM Kenya to see the possibilities of assisting the State of the Map Africa campaign that are going to be held in Kenya this year.MapUganda is also supporting resilience mappers, a local youth led mapping chapter from Makerere University. MapUganda is also supporting the growth and mentoring of multiple youthmappers in over 5 universities across the country.


Describe other OSM communities you plan to approach, or establish relationships with, for the purpose of the project
We recommend your response be a minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 400 words..

MapUganda plans to approach the OSM communities of Morocco about this project as some of their OSM community members have had a little more experience in working with mapillary for a little longer period. Through these interactions MapUganda plans to acquire more knowledge and experience with some of the OSM community members. MapUganda also plans to reach out to OSM cameroon, this is mainly because the community has also done multiple works with the promotion of OSM among governments especially local government and urban planning departments.This will allow MapUganda to soak up any experiences, knowledge and pointers the OSM community of cameroon might have to bolster the effective implementation of the project. OpenMapDevelopment Tanzania is also another organisation that MapUganda plans to reach out to. OSMTz is now in the early stages of testing out the collection of 360 images using simple smart phones applications like OpenDataKit and processing them using OpenDroneMap to develop 360 panoramas and points of an area. With this technology similar to geo street level photo mapping, more feature details could be captured and added to the OpenStreetMap platform. Therefore MapUganda plans to keep in touch with OSMtz team every step of the way to see the possibilities of trying out this tech solution through these mappillary and mapping campaigns.


Project plan and budget
Priority will be given to applications that collaborate with other OSM communities in the region. This can be country specific or regional and can include collaboration with Youth Mappers Chapters, or members of the HOT community to help with training, validation (as examples). For support in sourcing collaborators, email microgrants@hotosm.org.